Exploring the Resting State Neural Activity of Monolinguals and Late and Early Bilinguals

ABSTRACT
Individuals who speak more than one language have been found to enjoy a number of benefits not directly associated with the use of the languages themselves. One of these benefits is that bilingual individuals appear to develop symptoms of dementia 4-5 years later than comparable individuals who speak just one language. Studies on this topic, however, do not necessarily account for factors including if the individual learned their second language as a child or later in life, or their language proficiency. In an attempt to more carefully examine these variables, this study looks at structural and resting-state functional MRI scans of the default mode network, English and Spanish (where applicable) proficiency, language background, and demographics of young healthy adults who fall into one of three groups: early bilinguals, late bilinguals, and monolinguals. 

MRI METHODS

All imaging was performed on a 3T Siemens TIM Trio MRI scanner (Erlangen, Germany) using a 32-channel head coil at the BYU MRI Research Facility. Each participant contributed a structural MRI scan and a resting-state functional MRI scan. Structural scans used a T1-weighted MP-RAGE sequence with the following parameters: TR = 1900ms; TE = 2.26ms; acquisition matrix: 215 × 256; field of view = 218 × 250mm; slice thickness = 1.0mm; voxel size =.977 × .977 × 1.0mm; flip angle = 9°; and number of slices = 176; GRAPPA factor = 2. Resting state fMRI scans were performed using a T2*-weighted EPI sequence with the following parameters: TR = 875ms; TE = 43.6ms; slice thickness = 1.8mm; acquisition matrix = 100 × 100; flip angle = 55°; number of slices = 72; field of view = 180 × 180mm; voxel size = 1.8 × 1.8 × 1.8mm; multi-band factor = 8; volumes per run = 823 (total scan time = 12min). EPI scans were oriented parallel to the long axis of the hippocampus. All MRI scans were imported from DICOM to NIfTI file format using program dcm2nii (v. 1JUNE2015; http://www.nitrc.org/projects/mricron/). As part of the file conversion process, structural scans were reoriented to the nearest orthogonal using rigid-body transformation and extraneous field of view was cropped. Structural scans were further processed using the Advanced Normalization Tools (ANTs; http://stnava.github.io/ANTs/) suite of programs (Avants et al., 2011), which was used to perform skull stripping, tissue segmentation, and cortical thickness calculation using program antsCorticalThickness.sh. Skull-stripped structural scans were then rotated to the same orientation as the functional scans and then normalized to a lab specific template in MNI space using the ants.sh command. ANTs calculates a bidirectional warping from native subject space to template space. 

Functional scans were first motion corrected by aligning all volumes to the middle volume using AFNI program 3dVolreg (v. AFNI_16.3.03; https://afni.nimh.nih.gov) and then translated into MNI space using the warp vector fields calculated with ANTs. Scanner drift and residual head motion were then calculated using AFNI program 3dDeconvolve and were then used to identify effects of no interest in the fMRI signal using AFNI program 3dSynthesize. Effects of no interest were subtracted from the resting state data to produce a “cleaned” time course for all voxels. 

In order to define the Default Mode Network (DMN), we first identified bilateral retrosplenial cortex (also sometimes labeled precuneus or posterior cingulate cortex) by segmenting our lab specific template according to the Desikan-Killiany-Tourville protocol using the Joint Label Fusion toolkit and referencing the OASIS-TRT-20 dataset (Klein & Tourville, 2012; Tustison et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2013) via the ANTs command antsJointLabelFusion.sh. The seed region mask was used to extract a mean time course from each subject. Mean time courses were then used to calculate whole-brain correlations using AFNI program 3dTcorr1D. Pearson correlation r-values were Fisher z-transformed to ensure a normal distribution of scores for group-level analysis. The DMN was defined by identifying clusters with significant correlations with the retrosplenial seed region averaged across all subjects. To correct for multiple comparisons, all group-level analyses were thresholded using a voxel-wise p-value of p<.01 and a spatial extent threshold of k>118 contiguous voxels for an overall p-value of p<.05 as determined by Monte Carlo simulations. Five significant clusters were identified: medial prefrontal cortex (MPC), retrosplenial cortex (RSC), precuneus, left angular gyrus (LAG), and right angular gyrus (RAG). The retrosplenial and precuneus clusters were immediately adjacent to one another in the region of the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), but since we used a strict threshold for identifying clusters (whereby voxels were required to touch on a face rather than just on an edge or a corner), they were separated out into two different clusters.




References


Avants, B. B., Tustison, N. J., Song, G., Cook, P. A., Klein, A., & Gee, J. C. (2011). A reproducible evaluation of ANTs similarity metric performance in brain image registration. Neuroimage, 54(3), 2033-2044.
Klein, A., & Tourville, J. (2012). 101 labeled brain images and a consistent human cortical labeling protocol. Front Neurosci, 6, 171.
Tustison, N. J., Cook, P. A., Klein, A., Song, G., Das, S. R., Duda, J. T., Kandel, B. M., van Strien, N., Stone, J. R., Gee, J. C., & Avants, B. B. (2014). Large-scale evaluation of ANTs and FreeSurfer cortical thickness measurements. Neuroimage, 99, 166-179.
Wang, H., Suh, J. W., Das, S. R., Pluta, J. B., Craige, C., & Yushkevich, P. A. (2013). Multi-Atlas Segmentation with Joint Label Fusion. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell, 35(3), 611-623.

